content/about.md, before:

---
author: "Jon"
type: "sitecontent"
date: 2015-11-17T23:14:01+01:00
title: "About"
---

I'm a Software Developer using C#, JavaScript (including React and Redux). As penance for a past life, I have a lot of experience with VB6 too :)

Outside of work, I'm a Dad of 4. I'm married to [Di](http://dicain.co.uk).

I enjoy cycling, and am quite happy to tinker with one to get it working great (except when it's fixing a puncture in the rain!). I used to commute by bike to work, but since changing jobs in 2018, I've found the bus much easier so I'm yet to get on the bike for the commute.

I'm pretty interested in cars too, but unlike with the bikes, I'm much too scared to tinker with them in case things go wrong :)

I try to help out on StackOverflow when I get some free time which is pretty difficult for C# questions, as nobody's quicker at responding than Jon Skeet ;)

<a href="//stackoverflow.com/users/3157725/jonifen"><img src="//stackoverflow.com/users/flair/3157725.png" width="208" height="58" alt="profile for jonifen at Stack Overflow, Q&amp;A for professional and enthusiast programmers" title="profile for jonifen at Stack Overflow, Q&amp;A for professional and enthusiast programmers"></a>

Otherwise, I like to play video games. Nowadays, this is mainly on the PS4 and usually on the latest FIFA or Gran Turismo, although I did have a misspent youth on Quake 2, 3, Unreal Tournament and CounterStrike.

Want to get in touch? The options are at the bottom of every page :)

Commit message:

Update styling on tags page to match that in notes.
 Also re-categorised some posts

content/about.md, after:

---
author: "Jon"
type: "sitecontent"
date: 2020-09-09T21:10:21+01:00
title: "About"
---

Hi, I'm Jon.

I'm a Software Developer using C#, JavaScript (including React and Redux).

I started out creating mini utilities in MS Access (hey, that's all I had access to in work at the time!) to make my work easier back in the mid 2000s before becoming a VB6 developer in 2007.

Outside of work, I'm married and a Dad of 4.

I enjoy cycling, and try to get out for a ride when I can. I used to commute by bike to work, but since changing jobs in 2018, I've found the bus much easier so I'm yet to get on the bike for the commute.

I also drive a car, and often watch a variety of car programmes on TV.

I try to help out on StackOverflow when I get some free time which is pretty difficult for C# questions, as nobody's quicker at responding than Jon Skeet ;)

<a href="//stackoverflow.com/users/3157725/jonifen"><img src="//stackoverflow.com/users/flair/3157725.png" width="208" height="58" alt="profile for jonifen at Stack Overflow, Q&amp;A for professional and enthusiast programmers" title="profile for jonifen at Stack Overflow, Q&amp;A for professional and enthusiast programmers"></a>

Other than all that, I like to play video games. Nowadays, my preferences are Gran Turismo Sport on the PS4, or Quake Live on the PC. I had a misspent youth on Quake 2, 3, Unreal Tournament and CounterStrike.

Want to get in touch? Give us a shout on any of the options below.
