content/notes/hp-dm1-4027.md, before:

---
title: "HP DM1-4027"
type: "note"
description: "All about my HP DM1-4027 netbook"
---

## Laptop locks up in Linux - thermal event

I've recently started to use a HP DM1-4027ea as a replacement for the Asus Eee 1005P netbook. The 4Gb RAM (upgradable to 8Gb) and more powerful CPU/GPU combo meant that it should give reasonable performance where the Eee struggles (downloading npm modules and browsing script/image heavy websites).

The HP DM1-4027ea comes with an AMD E-450 APU which consists of a dual core 1.6GHz CPU and a Radeon HD6320 GPU, so on paper should still be acceptable for current mobile demands.

The HP works _okay_ in Windows 7 and 10, but I thought with an SSD and Arch Linux, it could be a perfect mobile workhorse. However, things didn't go quite according to plan as first of all, it gets pretty warm very quickly, and it would completely lock up seemingly at random, and I'd have to fully power it off before powering it back on.

After digging around online, I found other people with a similar issue (AMD E-450 APU locking up in Linux), and the solution was to edit the grub entry to add `thermal.off=1` at the end of the linux boot line which would result in the following (replacing `{uuid}` with your own UUID):

```
echo 'Loading Linux linux ...'
linux /boot/vmlinuz-linux root=UUID={uuid} rw quiet thermal.off=1
```

or it's best to edit `/etc/default/grub` to update the following line with the `thermal.off=1` entry:

```
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="loglevel=3 quiet thermal.off=1"
```

and regenerate the grub config with

```
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```

-----

Commit message:

Restore JS post, tidy up some note content

content/notes/hp-dm1-4027.md, after:

---
title: "HP DM1-4027"
type: "note"
description: "All about my HP DM1-4027 'netbook'"
---

## Hardware configuration

The laptop has an AMD E-450 APU installed and supports a maximum of 8GB ram.

Some other (perhaps useful) bits of info (according to `lspci`):

The GPU "element" is: AMD Radeon HD 6320 (Wrestler)

The wireless adapter is: Qualcomm Atheros AR9485 Wireless (rev 01)

The Ethernet adapter is: Realtek RTL8111/8168/8411 PCI Express Gigabit (rev 06)

-----

## Laptop locks up in Linux - thermal event

Sometimes in Linux I've noticed that the laptop will lock up, often in high CPU situations. This appears to be caused by some sort of thermal support (or lack of) and after some research, you can disable the thermal support within the OS and allow the BIOS to take over instead.

This is done by editing the grub entry to add `thermal.off=1` at the end of the linux boot line which would result in the following (replacing `{uuid}` with your own UUID):

```
echo 'Loading Linux linux ...'
linux /boot/vmlinuz-linux root=UUID={uuid} rw quiet thermal.off=1
```

To make the change permanent, edit `/etc/default/grub` to update the following line with the `thermal.off=1` entry:

```
GRUB_CMDLINE_LINUX_DEFAULT="loglevel=3 quiet thermal.off=1"
```

and regenerate the grub config with

```
grub-mkconfig -o /boot/grub/grub.cfg
```

-----
