content/notes/tv-installation.md, before:

---
title: "TV Installation"
type: "note"
---

### TV Installation (DIY)

I'm not a big DIY-er, but I do have a go from time to time. After having some home improvements work done on our house which included removing the chimney throughout the house, we're in need of a TV aerial. We have Sky as our main TV supply on the main TV, but in the bedrooms, we relied on the aerial, so I needed to find a solution fairly soon.

As the house is only just recovering from having a new bathroom and kitchen installed, I've been given the green light to do some work myself (RESULT!) and the TV aerial will be the first task.

From the back bedroom, we have line of sight to the local mast and as such, I'm going to install the aerial in the loft space and see how that works as it'll look cleaner from outside, and if things go wrong, I can get in the loft but I'm not too comfortable on a ladder up high so it's ideal :)

I'm going to start with the aerial that was on the roof and see how I get on. I need cabling, and I'm informed that cabling that is suitable for satellite feeds is also suitable for TV aerial feeds. I'm also going to move the Sky cabling so it's not running around the living room under skirting boards and carpets too, so only needing one reel of cable will be a nice way to save some cash along the way.

I'll draw up some diagrams as I go along (I'll leave them along with other diagrams I've created for the next owner if/when we decide to move in the future) and I'll put some of them on here as they may help people in my position.

#### Update 31/07/17

I started by needing to mount the aerial in the loft. The previous bracket wasn't suitable as it is intended for mounting on the corner of a chimney stack and I needed one that mounted on a flat base. I started with the Labgear mounting kit from Screwfix (code 34394), but then spotted a similar product at Wickes (code 205496) for just £2 on clearance! Dropped by the local store yesterday and picked it up.

I then needed coaxial cabling. Research tells me that the cheap rolls of wire from Argos or your local supermarket isn't much good, so I looked at satellite cabling and there was 2 types - RG6 and PF100. RG6 is better than the cheap packs you can pick up with your groceries, but with aluminium shielding, it might not be ideal for long distances (general consensus online is no more than a 15 metre limit). PF100 is the better cabling, has copper shielding so is better over longer distances and is generally better quality overall - note that you may not find it as PF100, some places have it under WF100 too. I bought a [100m reel of CT100 coaxial cable](/blogupload/2017_aerial_coax_roll.jpg) from Toolstation (code 71027) for £38 which isn't too unreasonable.

I installed the aerial mount last night, which included installing a piece of wood to straddle 2 joists in the loft. I had to move some insulation around (I'll move that back when everything is complete - don't forget this step or the house might get a bit chilly in the winter!)
I carried on this morning, drilling a hole in the ceiling in my son's bedroom (partially into the wall, I will be laying some conduit in the wall for the cabling to pass through). I ran a [length of hose pipe](/blogupload/2017_aerial_hose.jpg) through the hole that I could then pass the coaxial cable through. I then ran the cabling around the sides of the loft to my intended "control point" (leaving some excess), and then ran the cabling back to the aerial for installation.

While I know where the local mast is (in the autumn I can see it from my son's bedroom window - the trees are bushier in the summer), I looked at aerials on neighbouring houses and used the compass app on my phone to get a rough idea of the direction. I then went back into the loft, placed my phone on the aerial and tweaked the positioning until it was the same direction. I ended up [with this setup](/blogupload/2017_aerial_install.jpg) which seems alright.

*Next steps:* I need to obtain an aerial splitter which I can pick up from Toolstation (code 16238) or Screwfix (code 69265) - A 4-way splitter will be fine for now, but I may need to expand on that later on in the future. I'll need a load of F-type plugs at this point too.

#### Update 14/09/17

I was given a 2-way splitter for free to get the front bedroom linked up the aerial too until I get the 4-way one myself. I went into the loft and ran another coax wire from the front bedroom across to the point where the central place will be and installed an F-Plug connector. Then I cut the existing aerial run to the back bedroom and installed F-Plug connectors on them too.

Damn! I knew I'd be cutting the initial aerial feed wire to install a splitter, but didn't label either side of the wire at the spot where I'd be cutting it. It was easily sorted, just trial and error with the TVs tuned into a channel with a weak signal, only when the aerial was connected, did it resolve the issue.
I also wrapped some masking tape around the wires near the ends and wrote the destination of each on. This will be useful in the future if I ever need to diagnose a fault.

Commit message:

Some extra note tidying up

content/notes/tv-installation.md, after:

---
title: "TV Installation"
type: "note"
---

## TV Installation (DIY)

I've used the following items to install an aerial inside my loft space and then drop cables down in cavities or conduit buried in channels within the plaster.

- TV Aerial mounting kit - Wickes (code 205496) - I got mine for just £2 on clearance.
- CT100 coaxial cable - Toolstation (code 71027) - Cost me £38.
- F-Plug splitter - I got mine from Amazon, various places sell similar ones, get the one which offers enough ports and maybe 1 extra should you need to expand.

### Coaxial cabling notes

Research tells me that the cheap rolls of wire from Argos or your local supermarket isn't much good, so I looked at satellite cabling and there was 2 types - RG6 and PF100. RG6 is better than the cheap packs you can pick up with your groceries, but with aluminium shielding, it might not be ideal for long distances (general consensus online is no more than a 15 metre limit). PF100 is the better cabling, has copper shielding so is better over longer distances and is generally better quality overall - note that you may not find it as PF100, some places have it under WF100 or CT100 too. It seems to vary based on brand, but is identifiable by the copper shielding.

### Aerial alignment

While I know where the local mast is (I can see it from my son's bedroom window, especially at night when it's lit up), I looked at aerials on neighbouring houses and used the compass app on my phone to get a rough idea of the direction. I then went back into the loft, placed my phone on the aerial and tweaked the positioning until it was the same direction.

-----
